README.rst, before:

================================================================================
pyexcel-ods - Let you focus on data, instead of ods format
================================================================================

.. image:: https://api.travis-ci.org/pyexcel/pyexcel-ods.png
    :target: http://travis-ci.org/pyexcel/pyexcel-ods

.. image:: https://codecov.io/github/pyexcel/pyexcel-ods/coverage.png
    :target: https://codecov.io/github/pyexcel/pyexcel-ods

**pyexcel-ods** is a tiny wrapper library to read, manipulate and write data in
ods format using python 2.6 and python 2.7. You are likely to use it with
`pyexcel <https://github.com/pyexcel/pyexcel>`_.
`pyexcel-ods3 <https://github.com/pyexcel/pyexcel-ods3>`_ is a sister library that
does the same thing but supports Python 3.3 and 3.4 and depends on lxml.

Known constraints
==================

Fonts, colors and charts are not supported.

Installation
================================================================================

You can install it via pip:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ pip install pyexcel-ods


or clone it and install it:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ git clone http://github.com/pyexcel/pyexcel-ods.git
    $ cd pyexcel-ods
    $ python setup.py install

Usage
================================================================================

As a standalone library
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Write to an ods file
********************************************************************************

.. testcode::
   :hide:

    >>> import os
    >>> import sys
    >>> if sys.version_info[0] < 3:
    ...     from StringIO import StringIO
    ... else:
    ...     from io import BytesIO as StringIO
    >>> PY2 = sys.version_info[0] == 2
    >>> if PY2 and sys.version_info[1] < 7:
    ...      from ordereddict import OrderedDict
    ... else:
    ...     from collections import OrderedDict


Here's the sample code to write a dictionary to an ods file:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> from pyexcel_ods import save_data
    >>> data = OrderedDict() # from collections import OrderedDict
    >>> data.update({"Sheet 1": [[1, 2, 3], [4, 5, 6]]})
    >>> data.update({"Sheet 2": [["row 1", "row 2", "row 3"]]})
    >>> save_data("your_file.ods", data)

Read from an ods file
********************************************************************************

Here's the sample code:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> from pyexcel_ods import get_data
    >>> data = get_data("your_file.ods")
    >>> import json
    >>> print(json.dumps(data))
    {"Sheet 1": [[1, 2, 3], [4, 5, 6]], "Sheet 2": [["row 1", "row 2", "row 3"]]}


Write an ods to memory
********************************************************************************

Here's the sample code to write a dictionary to an ods file:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> from pyexcel_ods import save_data
    >>> data = OrderedDict()
    >>> data.update({"Sheet 1": [[1, 2, 3], [4, 5, 6]]})
    >>> data.update({"Sheet 2": [[7, 8, 9], [10, 11, 12]]})
    >>> io = StringIO()
    >>> save_data(io, data)
    >>> # do something with the io
    >>> # In reality, you might give it to your http response
    >>> # object for downloading



Read from an ods from memory
********************************************************************************

Continue from previous example:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> # This is just an illustration
    >>> # In reality, you might deal with ods file upload
    >>> # where you will read from requests.FILES['YOUR_ODS_FILE']
    >>> data = get_data(io)
    >>> print(json.dumps(data))
    {"Sheet 1": [[1, 2, 3], [4, 5, 6]], "Sheet 2": [[7, 8, 9], [10, 11, 12]]}


Pagination feature
********************************************************************************

Let's assume the following file is a huge ods file:

.. code-block:: python

   >>> huge_data = [
   ...     [1, 21, 31],
   ...     [2, 22, 32],
   ...     [3, 23, 33],
   ...     [4, 24, 34],
   ...     [5, 25, 35],
   ...     [6, 26, 36]
   ... ]
   >>> sheetx = {
   ...     "huge": huge_data
   ... }
   >>> save_data("huge_file.ods", sheetx)

And let's pretend to read partial data:

.. code-block:: python

   >>> partial_data = get_data("huge_file.ods", start_row=2, row_limit=3)
   >>> print(json.dumps(partial_data))
   {"huge": [[3, 23, 33], [4, 24, 34], [5, 25, 35]]}

And you could as well do the same for columns:

.. code-block:: python

   >>> partial_data = get_data("huge_file.ods", start_column=1, column_limit=2)
   >>> print(json.dumps(partial_data))
   {"huge": [[21, 31], [22, 32], [23, 33], [24, 34], [25, 35], [26, 36]]}

Obvious, you could do both at the same time:

.. code-block:: python

   >>> partial_data = get_data("huge_file.ods",
   ...     start_row=2, row_limit=3,
   ...     start_column=1, column_limit=2)
   >>> print(json.dumps(partial_data))
   {"huge": [[23, 33], [24, 34], [25, 35]]}

.. testcode::
   :hide:

   >>> os.unlink("huge_file.ods")


As a pyexcel plugin
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

No longer, explicit import is needed since pyexcel version 0.2.2. Instead,
this library is auto-loaded. So if you want to read data in ods format,
installing it is enough.

Any version under pyexcel 0.2.2, you have to keep doing the following:

Import it in your file to enable this plugin:

.. code-block:: python

    from pyexcel.ext import ods

Please note only pyexcel version 0.0.4+ support this.


Reading from an ods file
********************************************************************************

Here is the sample code:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> import pyexcel as pe
    >>> # from pyexcel.ext import ods
    >>> sheet = pe.get_book(file_name="your_file.ods")
    >>> sheet
    Sheet 1:
    +---+---+---+
    | 1 | 2 | 3 |
    +---+---+---+
    | 4 | 5 | 6 |
    +---+---+---+
    Sheet 2:
    +-------+-------+-------+
    | row 1 | row 2 | row 3 |
    +-------+-------+-------+


Writing to an ods file
********************************************************************************

Here is the sample code:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> sheet.save_as("another_file.ods")


Reading from a IO instance
********************************************************************************

You got to wrap the binary content with stream to get ods working:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> # This is just an illustration
    >>> # In reality, you might deal with ods file upload
    >>> # where you will read from requests.FILES['YOUR_ODS_FILE']
    >>> odsfile = "another_file.ods"
    >>> with open(odsfile, "rb") as f:
    ...     content = f.read()
    ...     r = pe.get_book(file_type="ods", file_content=content)
    ...     print(r)
    ...
    Sheet 1:
    +---+---+---+
    | 1 | 2 | 3 |
    +---+---+---+
    | 4 | 5 | 6 |
    +---+---+---+
    Sheet 2:
    +-------+-------+-------+
    | row 1 | row 2 | row 3 |
    +-------+-------+-------+


Writing to a StringIO instance
********************************************************************************

You need to pass a StringIO instance to Writer:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> data = [
    ...     [1, 2, 3],
    ...     [4, 5, 6]
    ... ]
    >>> io = StringIO()
    >>> sheet = pe.Sheet(data)
    >>> io = sheet.save_to_memory("ods", io)
    >>> # then do something with io
    >>> # In reality, you might give it to your http response
    >>> # object for downloading

License
================================================================================

New BSD License

Developer guide
==================

Development steps for code changes

#. git clone https://github.com/pyexcel/pyexcel-ods.git
#. cd pyexcel-ods

Upgrade your setup tools and pip. They are needed for development and testing only:

#. pip install --upgrade setuptools "pip==7.1"

Then install relevant development requirements:

#. pip install -r rnd_requirements.txt # if such a file exists
#. pip install -r requirements.txt
#. pip install -r tests/requirements.txt


In order to update test environment, and documentation, additional setps are
required:

#. pip install moban
#. git clone https://github.com/pyexcel/pyexcel-commons.git commons
#. make your changes in `.moban.d` directory, then issue command `moban`

What is rnd_requirements.txt
-------------------------------

Usually, it is created when a dependent library is not released. Once the dependecy is installed(will be released), the future version of the dependency in the requirements.txt will be valid.

What is pyexcel-commons
---------------------------------

Many information that are shared across pyexcel projects, such as: this developer guide, license info, etc. are stored in `pyexcel-commons` project.

What is .moban.d
---------------------------------

`.moban.d` stores the specific meta data for the library.

How to test your contribution
------------------------------

Although `nose` and `doctest` are both used in code testing, it is adviable that unit tests are put in tests. `doctest` is incorporated only to make sure the code examples in documentation remain valid across different development releases.

On Linux/Unix systems, please launch your tests like this::

    $ make test

On Windows systems, please issue this command::

    > test.bat

Credits
================================================================================

ODSReader is originally written by `Marco Conti <https://github.com/marcoconti83/read-ods-with-odfpy>`_

.. testcode::
   :hide:

   >>> import os
   >>> os.unlink("your_file.ods")
   >>> os.unlink("another_file.ods")

Commit message:

serve a special notice on the performance of the pagination feature

README.rst, after:

================================================================================
pyexcel-ods - Let you focus on data, instead of ods format
================================================================================

.. image:: https://api.travis-ci.org/pyexcel/pyexcel-ods.png
    :target: http://travis-ci.org/pyexcel/pyexcel-ods

.. image:: https://codecov.io/github/pyexcel/pyexcel-ods/coverage.png
    :target: https://codecov.io/github/pyexcel/pyexcel-ods

**pyexcel-ods** is a tiny wrapper library to read, manipulate and write data in
ods format using python 2.6 and python 2.7. You are likely to use it with
`pyexcel <https://github.com/pyexcel/pyexcel>`_.
`pyexcel-ods3 <https://github.com/pyexcel/pyexcel-ods3>`_ is a sister library that
does the same thing but supports Python 3.3 and 3.4 and depends on lxml.

Known constraints
==================

Fonts, colors and charts are not supported.

Installation
================================================================================

You can install it via pip:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ pip install pyexcel-ods


or clone it and install it:

.. code-block:: bash

    $ git clone http://github.com/pyexcel/pyexcel-ods.git
    $ cd pyexcel-ods
    $ python setup.py install

Usage
================================================================================

As a standalone library
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

Write to an ods file
********************************************************************************

.. testcode::
   :hide:

    >>> import os
    >>> import sys
    >>> if sys.version_info[0] < 3:
    ...     from StringIO import StringIO
    ... else:
    ...     from io import BytesIO as StringIO
    >>> PY2 = sys.version_info[0] == 2
    >>> if PY2 and sys.version_info[1] < 7:
    ...      from ordereddict import OrderedDict
    ... else:
    ...     from collections import OrderedDict


Here's the sample code to write a dictionary to an ods file:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> from pyexcel_ods import save_data
    >>> data = OrderedDict() # from collections import OrderedDict
    >>> data.update({"Sheet 1": [[1, 2, 3], [4, 5, 6]]})
    >>> data.update({"Sheet 2": [["row 1", "row 2", "row 3"]]})
    >>> save_data("your_file.ods", data)

Read from an ods file
********************************************************************************

Here's the sample code:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> from pyexcel_ods import get_data
    >>> data = get_data("your_file.ods")
    >>> import json
    >>> print(json.dumps(data))
    {"Sheet 1": [[1, 2, 3], [4, 5, 6]], "Sheet 2": [["row 1", "row 2", "row 3"]]}


Write an ods to memory
********************************************************************************

Here's the sample code to write a dictionary to an ods file:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> from pyexcel_ods import save_data
    >>> data = OrderedDict()
    >>> data.update({"Sheet 1": [[1, 2, 3], [4, 5, 6]]})
    >>> data.update({"Sheet 2": [[7, 8, 9], [10, 11, 12]]})
    >>> io = StringIO()
    >>> save_data(io, data)
    >>> # do something with the io
    >>> # In reality, you might give it to your http response
    >>> # object for downloading



Read from an ods from memory
********************************************************************************

Continue from previous example:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> # This is just an illustration
    >>> # In reality, you might deal with ods file upload
    >>> # where you will read from requests.FILES['YOUR_ODS_FILE']
    >>> data = get_data(io)
    >>> print(json.dumps(data))
    {"Sheet 1": [[1, 2, 3], [4, 5, 6]], "Sheet 2": [[7, 8, 9], [10, 11, 12]]}


Pagination feature
********************************************************************************

Special notice 30/01/2017: due to the constraints of the underlying 3rd party
library, it will read the whole file before returning the paginated data. So
at the end of day, the only benefit is less data returned from the reading
function. No major performance improvement will be seen.

Let's assume the following file is a huge ods file:

.. code-block:: python

   >>> huge_data = [
   ...     [1, 21, 31],
   ...     [2, 22, 32],
   ...     [3, 23, 33],
   ...     [4, 24, 34],
   ...     [5, 25, 35],
   ...     [6, 26, 36]
   ... ]
   >>> sheetx = {
   ...     "huge": huge_data
   ... }
   >>> save_data("huge_file.ods", sheetx)

And let's pretend to read partial data:

.. code-block:: python

   >>> partial_data = get_data("huge_file.ods", start_row=2, row_limit=3)
   >>> print(json.dumps(partial_data))
   {"huge": [[3, 23, 33], [4, 24, 34], [5, 25, 35]]}

And you could as well do the same for columns:

.. code-block:: python

   >>> partial_data = get_data("huge_file.ods", start_column=1, column_limit=2)
   >>> print(json.dumps(partial_data))
   {"huge": [[21, 31], [22, 32], [23, 33], [24, 34], [25, 35], [26, 36]]}

Obvious, you could do both at the same time:

.. code-block:: python

   >>> partial_data = get_data("huge_file.ods",
   ...     start_row=2, row_limit=3,
   ...     start_column=1, column_limit=2)
   >>> print(json.dumps(partial_data))
   {"huge": [[23, 33], [24, 34], [25, 35]]}

.. testcode::
   :hide:

   >>> os.unlink("huge_file.ods")


As a pyexcel plugin
--------------------------------------------------------------------------------

No longer, explicit import is needed since pyexcel version 0.2.2. Instead,
this library is auto-loaded. So if you want to read data in ods format,
installing it is enough.

Any version under pyexcel 0.2.2, you have to keep doing the following:

Import it in your file to enable this plugin:

.. code-block:: python

    from pyexcel.ext import ods

Please note only pyexcel version 0.0.4+ support this.


Reading from an ods file
********************************************************************************

Here is the sample code:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> import pyexcel as pe
    >>> # from pyexcel.ext import ods
    >>> sheet = pe.get_book(file_name="your_file.ods")
    >>> sheet
    Sheet 1:
    +---+---+---+
    | 1 | 2 | 3 |
    +---+---+---+
    | 4 | 5 | 6 |
    +---+---+---+
    Sheet 2:
    +-------+-------+-------+
    | row 1 | row 2 | row 3 |
    +-------+-------+-------+


Writing to an ods file
********************************************************************************

Here is the sample code:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> sheet.save_as("another_file.ods")


Reading from a IO instance
********************************************************************************

You got to wrap the binary content with stream to get ods working:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> # This is just an illustration
    >>> # In reality, you might deal with ods file upload
    >>> # where you will read from requests.FILES['YOUR_ODS_FILE']
    >>> odsfile = "another_file.ods"
    >>> with open(odsfile, "rb") as f:
    ...     content = f.read()
    ...     r = pe.get_book(file_type="ods", file_content=content)
    ...     print(r)
    ...
    Sheet 1:
    +---+---+---+
    | 1 | 2 | 3 |
    +---+---+---+
    | 4 | 5 | 6 |
    +---+---+---+
    Sheet 2:
    +-------+-------+-------+
    | row 1 | row 2 | row 3 |
    +-------+-------+-------+


Writing to a StringIO instance
********************************************************************************

You need to pass a StringIO instance to Writer:

.. code-block:: python

    >>> data = [
    ...     [1, 2, 3],
    ...     [4, 5, 6]
    ... ]
    >>> io = StringIO()
    >>> sheet = pe.Sheet(data)
    >>> io = sheet.save_to_memory("ods", io)
    >>> # then do something with io
    >>> # In reality, you might give it to your http response
    >>> # object for downloading

License
================================================================================

New BSD License

Developer guide
==================

Development steps for code changes

#. git clone https://github.com/pyexcel/pyexcel-ods.git
#. cd pyexcel-ods

Upgrade your setup tools and pip. They are needed for development and testing only:

#. pip install --upgrade setuptools "pip==7.1"

Then install relevant development requirements:

#. pip install -r rnd_requirements.txt # if such a file exists
#. pip install -r requirements.txt
#. pip install -r tests/requirements.txt


In order to update test environment, and documentation, additional setps are
required:

#. pip install moban
#. git clone https://github.com/pyexcel/pyexcel-commons.git commons
#. make your changes in `.moban.d` directory, then issue command `moban`

What is rnd_requirements.txt
-------------------------------

Usually, it is created when a dependent library is not released. Once the dependecy is installed(will be released), the future version of the dependency in the requirements.txt will be valid.

What is pyexcel-commons
---------------------------------

Many information that are shared across pyexcel projects, such as: this developer guide, license info, etc. are stored in `pyexcel-commons` project.

What is .moban.d
---------------------------------

`.moban.d` stores the specific meta data for the library.

How to test your contribution
------------------------------

Although `nose` and `doctest` are both used in code testing, it is adviable that unit tests are put in tests. `doctest` is incorporated only to make sure the code examples in documentation remain valid across different development releases.

On Linux/Unix systems, please launch your tests like this::

    $ make test

On Windows systems, please issue this command::

    > test.bat

Credits
================================================================================

ODSReader is originally written by `Marco Conti <https://github.com/marcoconti83/read-ods-with-odfpy>`_

.. testcode::
   :hide:

   >>> import os
   >>> os.unlink("your_file.ods")
   >>> os.unlink("another_file.ods")
